[1.13] Add docs for SQLite name resolver (#3991)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/reference/components-reference/supported-name-resolution/nr-sqlite.md

---
type: docs
title: "SQLite name resolution provider"
linkTitle: "SQLite"
description: Detailed information on the SQLite name resolution component
---

> The SQLite name resolution component offers an alternative to mDNS for running Dapr on single-node environments and for local development scenarios. Dapr sidecars part of the cluster store their information in a SQLite database on the local machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an alternative to mDNS, the SQLite name resolution component can be used for running Dapr on single-node environments and for local development scenarios. Dapr sidecars that are part of the cluster store their information in a SQLite database on the local machine.
```

> > This component is optimized to be used in scenarios where all Dapr instances are running on the same physical machine, where the database is accessed through the same, locally-mounted disk.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}

This component is optimized to be used in scenarios where all Dapr instances are running on the same physical machine, where the database is accessed through the same, locally-mounted disk.  
```

> > Using the SQLite nameresolver with a database file accessed over the network (including via SMB/NFS) can lead to issues including data corruption, and is not supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the SQLite nameresolver with a database file accessed over the network (including via SMB/NFS) can lead to issues such as data corruption, and is **not supported**.
{{% /alert %}}
```

## Configuration format

Name resolution is configured via the [Dapr Configuration]({{< ref configuration-overview.md >}}).

Within the Configuration YAML, set the `spec.nameResolution.component` property to `"sqlite"`, then pass configuration options in the `spec.nameResolution.configuration` dictionary.

This is the basic example of a Configuration resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Configuration
metadata:
  name: appconfig
spec:
  nameResolution:
    component: "sqlite"
    version: "v1"
    configuration:
      connectionString: "/home/user/.dapr/nr.db"
```

## Spec configuration fields

> When using the SQLite component as name resolver, the `spec.nameResolution.configuration` dictionary contains these options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the SQLite component as name resolver, the `spec.nameResolution.configuration` dictionary contains these options:
```

| Field        | Required | Type | Details  | Examples |
|--------------|:--------:|-----:|:---------|----------|
| `connectionString` | Y | `string` | The connection string for the SQLite database. Normally, this is the path to a file on disk, relative to the current working directory, or absolute. | `"nr.db"` (relative to the working directory), `"/home/user/.dapr/nr.db"` |

> | `updateInterval` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval for active Dapr sidecars to update their status in the database.<br>Must be at least 1s greater than `timeout`. Values with fractions of seconds are truncated (e.g. `1500ms` becomes `1s`). Default: `5s` | `"2s"` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `updateInterval` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval for active Dapr sidecars to update their status in the database.<br>Must be at least 1s greater than `timeout`. Values with fractions of seconds are truncated (for example, `1500ms` becomes `1s`). Default: `5s` | `"2s"` |
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}

This component is optimized to be used in scenarios where all Dapr instances are running on the same physical machine, where the database is accessed through the same, locally-mounted disk.  
Using the SQLite nameresolver with a database file accessed over the network (including via SMB/NFS) can lead to issues such as data corruption, and is **not supported**.
{{% /alert %}}

## Configuration format

Name resolution is configured via the [Dapr Configuration]({{< ref configuration-overview.md >}}).

Within the Configuration YAML, set the `spec.nameResolution.component` property to `"sqlite"`, then pass configuration options in the `spec.nameResolution.configuration` dictionary.

This is the basic example of a Configuration resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Configuration
metadata:
  name: appconfig
spec:
  nameResolution:
    component: "sqlite"
    version: "v1"
    configuration:
      connectionString: "/home/user/.dapr/nr.db"
```

## Spec configuration fields

> When using the SQLite component as name resolver, the `spec.nameResolution.configuration` dictionary contains these options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using the SQLite name resolver component, the `spec.nameResolution.configuration` dictionary contains these options:
```

| Field        | Required | Type | Details  | Examples |
|--------------|:--------:|-----:|:---------|----------|
| `connectionString` | Y | `string` | The connection string for the SQLite database. Normally, this is the path to a file on disk, relative to the current working directory, or absolute. | `"nr.db"` (relative to the working directory), `"/home/user/.dapr/nr.db"` |

> | `updateInterval` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval for active Dapr sidecars to update their status in the database.<br>Must be at least 1s greater than `timeout`. Values with fractions of seconds are truncated (for example, `1500ms` becomes `1s`). Default: `5s` | `"2s"` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `updateInterval` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval for active Dapr sidecars to update their status in the database. This is an advanced setting that controls how often an app updates the database to indicate that it is still alive. <br>Must be at least 1s greater than `timeout`. Values with fractions of seconds are truncated (for example, `1500ms` becomes `1s`). Default: `5s` | `"2s"` |
```

Author: ```suggestion
| `updateInterval` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval for active Dapr sidecars to update their status in the database, which is used as healthcheck.<br>Smaller intervals reduce the likelihood of stale data being returned if an application goes offline, but increase the load on the database.<br>Must be at least 1s greater than `timeout`. Values with fractions of seconds are truncated (for example, `1500ms` becomes `1s`). Default: `5s` | `"2s"` |
```

Author: Does the above work?

> | `updateInterval` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval for active Dapr sidecars to update their status in the database.<br>Must be at least 1s greater than `timeout`. Values with fractions of seconds are truncated (for example, `1500ms` becomes `1s`). Default: `5s` | `"2s"` |

Reviewer 2: why would you want to change this setting? What is the scenario?

Author: Most users should not change this setting; it's an advanced thing. It controls how often apps update the DB to indicate they are still alive.

Reviewer 2: Ok. I added a comment

> | `timeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`).<br>Must be at least 1s. | Timeout for operations on the database. Integers are interpreted as number of seconds. Defaults to `1s` | `"2s"`, `2` |

Reviewer 2: Same here. why would you want to change this setting? What is the scenario? Is this due to a retry or just because a db may be slow?

Author: Yes this is just to prevent the DB from hanging. 1s should be fine if the DB is local

Reviewer 2: I added some text here.

> | `tableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table where the data is stored. Defaults to `hosts`. | `"hosts"` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `tableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table where the data is stored. If the table does not exists, the table is created by Dapr.  Defaults to `hosts`. | `"hosts"` |
```

> | `tableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table where the data is stored. Defaults to `hosts`. | `"hosts"` |

Reviewer 2: Is this table created automatically by Dapr, or do you need to create this in advance?

Author: Everything is automatic

> | `timeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`).<br>Must be at least 1s. | Timeout for operations on the database. Integers are interpreted as number of seconds. Defaults to `1s` | `"2s"`, `2` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `timeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`).<br>Must be at least 1s. | Timeout for the entire operation on the database. Integers are interpreted as number of seconds. Can also prevent database from hanging after `busyTimeout` is cleared. For example Defaults to `1s` | `"2s"`, `2` |
```

Author: I personally would rather not focus too much on busyTimeout. It's an advanced setting and, especially for a name-resolver, 99.99% of users should not need to touch it (and if they do, something's wrong with their system).

> | `metadataTableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table used by Dapr to store metadata for the component. Defaults to `metadata`. | `"metadata"` |

Reviewer 2: Is this table created automatically by Dapr, or do you need to create this?

Author: Everything is automatic

> | `tableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table where the data is stored. If the table does not exists, the table is created by Dapr.  Defaults to `hosts`. | `"hosts"` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table where the data is stored. If the table does not exist, the table is created by Dapr.  Defaults to `hosts`. | `"hosts"` |
```

| `cleanupInterval` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval to remove stale records from the database. Default: `1h` (1 hour) | `"10m"` |

> | `busyTimeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval to wait in case the SQLite database is currently busy serving another request, before returning a "database busy" error. Default: `800ms` (800 milliseconds) | `"100ms"` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `busyTimeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval to wait in case the SQLite database is currently busy serving another request, before returning a "database busy" error. This is an advanced setting.
 - `busyTimeout` controls how locking works in SQLite. With SQLite, writes are exclusive, so every time any app is writing the database is locked. If another app tries to write, it waits up to `busyTimeout` before returning the "database busy" error. However the `timeout` setting controls the timeout for the entire operation. For example if the query "hangs", after the database has acquired the lock (so after busy timeout is cleared), then `timeout` comes into effect. Default: `800ms` (800 milliseconds) | `"100ms"` |
```

> | `busyTimeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval to wait in case the SQLite database is currently busy serving another request, before returning a "database busy" error. Default: `800ms` (800 milliseconds) | `"100ms"` |

Reviewer 2: How does this relate to the timeout above? They sound like they do the same thing. When would I set this over using timeout above. Would be great to have some guidance here in the doc

Author: There's some overlap, but they behave differently.

- busy timeout controls how locking works in SQLite. With SQLite, writes are exclusive, so every time any app is writing something, the DB is locked. If another app tries to write, it will wait up to "busy timeout" before returning the "database busy" error
- the timeout option controls the timeout for the entire operation. For example if the query "hangs", after the DB has acquired the lock (so after busy timeout is cleared), then timeout comes into effect

For SQLite, most users should not touch this

> | `disableWAL` | N | `bool` | If set to true, disables Write-Ahead Logging for journaling of the SQLite database. This is for advanced scenarios only | `true`, `false` |

Reviewer 2: Any scenario when I would set this to true?

Author: Not really. For the state store this _could_ be used if the DB is on a networked filesystem (like SMB/NFS). But it's a dangerous thing to set.

However because the code used for this component is in part shared with the state store, this metadata option came in "for free"

> | `busyTimeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval to wait in case the SQLite database is currently busy serving another request, before returning a "database busy" error. This is an advanced setting.</br>`busyTimeout` controls how locking works in SQLite. With SQLite, writes are exclusive, so every time any app is writing the database is locked. If another app tries to write, it waits up to `busyTimeout` before returning the "database busy" error. However the `timeout` setting controls the timeout for the entire operation. For example if the query "hangs", after the database has acquired the lock (so after busy timeout is cleared), then `timeout` comes into effect. Default: `800ms` (800 milliseconds) | `"100ms"` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `busyTimeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval to wait in case the SQLite database is currently busy serving another request, before returning a "database busy" error. This is an advanced setting.</br>While `timeout` controls the timeout for the entire operation, `busyTimeout` controls how locking works in SQLite. With SQLite, writes are exclusive, so every time any app is writing the database is locked. If another app tries to write, it waits up to `busyTimeout` before returning the "database busy" error. If the query "hangs" after the database has acquired the lock (after `busyTimeout` is cleared), then `timeout` comes into effect. Default: `800ms` (800 milliseconds) | `"100ms"` |
```

Author: See my comment above

| `connectionString` | Y | `string` | The connection string for the SQLite database. Normally, this is the path to a file on disk, relative to the current working directory, or absolute. | `"nr.db"` (relative to the working directory), `"/home/user/.dapr/nr.db"` |
| `updateInterval` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval for active Dapr sidecars to update their status in the database, which is used as healthcheck.<br>Smaller intervals reduce the likelihood of stale data being returned if an application goes offline, but increase the load on the database.<br>Must be at least 1s greater than `timeout`. Values with fractions of seconds are truncated (for example, `1500ms` becomes `1s`). Default: `5s` | `"2s"` |
| `timeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`).<br>Must be at least 1s. | Timeout for operations on the database. Integers are interpreted as number of seconds. Defaults to `1s` | `"2s"`, `2` |
| `tableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table where the data is stored. If the table does not exists, the table is created by Dapr.  Defaults to `hosts`. | `"hosts"` |

> | `metadataTableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table used by Dapr to store metadata for the component. Defaults to `metadata`. | `"metadata"` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `metadataTableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table used by Dapr to store metadata for the component. If the table does not exist, the table is created by Dapr. Defaults to `metadata`. | `"metadata"` |
```

| `timeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`).<br>Must be at least 1s. | Timeout for operations on the database. Integers are interpreted as number of seconds. Defaults to `1s` | `"2s"`, `2` |
| `tableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table where the data is stored. If the table does not exists, the table is created by Dapr.  Defaults to `hosts`. | `"hosts"` |
| `metadataTableName` | N | `string` | Name of the table used by Dapr to store metadata for the component. If the table does not exist, the table is created by Dapr. Defaults to `metadata`. | `"metadata"` |
| `cleanupInterval` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval to remove stale records from the database. Default: `1h` (1 hour) | `"10m"` |

> | `busyTimeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval to wait in case the SQLite database is currently busy serving another request, before returning a "database busy" error. This is an advanced setting.</br>`busyTimeout` controls how locking works in SQLite. With SQLite, writes are exclusive, so every time any app is writing the database is locked. If another app tries to write, it waits up to `busyTimeout` before returning the "database busy" error. However the `timeout` setting controls the timeout for the entire operation. For example if the query "hangs", after the database has acquired the lock (so after busy timeout is cleared), then `timeout` comes into effect. Default: `800ms` (800 milliseconds) | `"100ms"` |

Author: I don't think we need to explain this (and especially I wasn't thinking my words would be used in the docs, or I'd have written something better :) ). I'd just say "This is an advanced setting"

```suggestion
| `busyTimeout` | N | [Go duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) (as a `string`) | Interval to wait in case the SQLite database is currently busy serving another request, before returning a "database busy" error.<br>This is an advanced setting that controls how long to wait if the database is locked by another transaction.<br>Default: `800ms` (800 milliseconds) | `"100ms"` |
```
